Post: ARIA roles in-depth (#1070)
a11yproject/a11yproject.com: src/posts/2020-08-20-an-indepth-guide-to-aria-roles.md

---
layout: post
title: An in-depth guide to ARIA roles
description: ARIA roles are one half of the predefined categories of attributes used to describe elements that may not exist natively in browsers or may not be understood by screen readers and other assistive technologies.
category: Background
author: Duncan Jimbo
date: 2020-08-20
eleventyNavigation:
  key: {{ category }}
  title: {{ title }}
tags:
  - background
---

> The ARIA specification is divided into categories of attributes, one of which is Roles, and the other being States & Properties. ARIA roles, which are covered in this article, are generally used to describe elements that may not exist within HTML, or elements which may not have full cross-browser support, or have implementation gaps in screen readers and other assistive technologies. For instance, ARIA roles can be useful in situations where native HTML semantics are not understood in legacy user agents (e.g., browsers).

Reviewer: >The ARIA specification

Can we link to the ARIA specification? A new reader may be unfamiliar with it, so a link would preempt their searching for it.

> The ARIA specification is divided into categories of attributes, one of which is Roles, and the other being States & Properties. ARIA roles, which are covered in this article, are generally used to describe elements that may not exist within HTML, or elements which may not have full cross-browser support, or have implementation gaps in screen readers and other assistive technologies. For instance, ARIA roles can be useful in situations where native HTML semantics are not understood in legacy user agents (e.g., browsers).

Reviewer: >ARIA roles, which are covered in this article, are generally used to describe elements that may not exist within HTML, or elements which may not have full cross-browser support, or have implementation gaps in screen readers and other assistive technologies. 

This is a rather long sentence. What do you think about breaking it up so it reads: 

>ARIA roles, which are covered in this article, are generally used to describe elements: 
>
>- that may not exist within HTML, 
>- which may not have full cross-browser support, 
>- or have implementation gaps in screen readers and other assistive technologies.

> The ARIA specification is divided into categories of attributes, one of which is Roles, and the other being States & Properties. ARIA roles, which are covered in this article, are generally used to describe elements that may not exist within HTML, or elements which may not have full cross-browser support, or have implementation gaps in screen readers and other assistive technologies. For instance, ARIA roles can be useful in situations where native HTML semantics are not understood in legacy user agents (e.g., browsers).

Reviewer: >not understood in legacy user agents (e.g., browsers).

What do you think about just using "older browsers" instead of "legacy user agents"? Part of me thinks that "older browsers" is a little easier to understand, yet less descriptive, but the other part of me thinks that the way you've originally authored it is more precise, but jargony.

Reviewer 2: that was a me request.  browsers are one concern, other applications that can parse ARIA/HTML (AT, ePub, etc) being the other.

Reviewer: Gotcha. Resolving!

> Thes ARIA specification is divided into predefined categories of attributes, one of which is Roles, and the other being States & Properties. ARIA roles, which are covered in this article, are generally used to describe elements that may not exist natively within current HTML standards, have full cross-browser support, or be understood by screen readers and other assistive technologies. They are also useful in situations where existing HTML markup is written in older HTML standards that do not include newer, more semantic tags.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The ARIA specification is divided into categories of attributes, one of which is Roles, and the other being States & Properties. ARIA roles, which are covered in this article, are generally used to describe elements that may not exist within HTML, or elements which may not have full cross-browser support, or have implementation gaps in screen readers and other assistive technologies. For instance, ARIA roles can be useful in situations where native HTML semantics are not understood in legacy user agents (e.g., browsers).
```

## Usage

ARIA roles are added to elements using the `role="<ROLE_TYPE>` attribute, where `ROLE_TYPE` represents the specific role being added. Once an ARIA role is set on an element, it should not be changed, regardless of the state of the element. In some cases, roles have to be paired with the appropriate ARIA state or property. However, this article's examples have reduced markup to limit the scope to just ARIA roles.

ARIA roles are broken down into six categories:

> 1. Abstract Roles

Reviewer: It'd be nice to wrap each of these bullet items in a link that points to the ID of each heading.

2. Document Structure Roles
3. Landmark Roles
4. Live Region Roles
5. Widget Roles
6. Window Roles

### Abstract roles

Abstract roles are only intended for use by browsers to help organize and streamline a document. They should not be used by developers writing HTML markup. Doing so will not result in any meaningful information being conveyed to assistive technologies or to users.

### Document Structure roles

> Document roles are used to provide a structural description for a section of content. A majority of the available roles in this category resemble available semantic HTML tags and it is recommended to only use them when an appropriate native tag is not available. The roles in this category are also not typically interactive in nature, but may be used to contain other roles that are interactive. The `toolbar"` and `tooltip"` roles, demonstrated below, serve as good examples of when to use Document Structure roles to provide information to assistive technologies when the equivalent native HTML tag is not available.

Reviewer: >The roles in this category are also not typically interactive in nature, 

New thought, new paragraph. Shorter paragraphs will help the reader stay engaged, expecially on a longer and more technical piece like this.

> Document roles are used to provide a structural description for a section of content. A majority of the available roles in this category resemble available semantic HTML tags and it is recommended to only use them when an appropriate native tag is not available. The roles in this category are also not typically interactive in nature, but may be used to contain other roles that are interactive. The `toolbar"` and `tooltip"` roles, demonstrated below, serve as good examples of when to use Document Structure roles to provide information to assistive technologies when the equivalent native HTML tag is not available.

Reviewer: >`toolbar"`

Looks like there's a missing opening quote.

> Document roles are used to provide a structural description for a section of content. A majority of the available roles in this category resemble available semantic HTML tags and it is recommended to only use them when an appropriate native tag is not available. The roles in this category are also not typically interactive in nature, but may be used to contain other roles that are interactive. The `toolbar"` and `tooltip"` roles, demonstrated below, serve as good examples of when to use Document Structure roles to provide information to assistive technologies when the equivalent native HTML tag is not available.

Reviewer: >The toolbar" and tooltip" roles, demonstrated below, 

One thing I try to do is utilize language that doesn't refer to visual orientation. I like using language like, "The following examples of `toolbar` and `tooltip'` roles" so a non-sighted user will know to expect the content announcement.

#### Toolbar example

```html
<div role="toolbar">
  <div class="text-characteristics">
    <button>Bold</button>
    <button>Italic</button>
    <button>Underline</button>
  </div>

  <div class="text-alignment">
    <button>Left</button>
    <button>Middle</button>
    <button>Right</button>
  </div>
</div>
```

#### Tooltip example

```html

> <button>Show Tooltip</button>  

Reviewer 2: the tooltip role by itself is typically not exposed (i.e., AT typically doesn't even get the chance to interact directly with the role, and those that do rarely announce the role).

`aria-describedby` is essential in ensuring that the tooltip content is associated with the element it describes, so if this example is used, `aria-describeby` should be incorporated into it.

<div role="tooltip" id="notifications-desc">View and manage notifications</div>  
```

> - View the [full list of available Document Structure roles](https://www.w3.org/TR/wai-aria/#document_structure_roles).

Reviewer: Can we use a paragraph here instead of an unordered list?

### Landmark Roles

> Landmark roles identify content areas within a page, and as the name implies serve as navigational landmarks for the types of content areas that users may be interested in. These content areas include the page's primary content, collections of navigation links, and search functions to name a few.

Reviewer: >Landmark roles identify content areas within a page, and as the name implies serve as navigational landmarks for the types of content areas that users may be interested in.

How about this?

>Landmark roles identify content areas within a page. They serve as navigational landmarks for the types of content areas that users may be interested in.

My thinking is that these are two separate thoughts, and it helps to keep the sentences shorter.

> Most Landmark roles may also be reasonably associated with native HTML tags. For example:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Most Landmark roles are also implicitly exposed via specific Grouping and Sectioning HTML elements. For example:
```

> - The `banner` role can be associated with the `<header>` tag

Reviewer 2: "element" not "tag"

- The `complementary` role can be associated with the `<aside>` tag
- The `contentinfo` role can be associated with the `<footer>` tag

> Because the support for some of the above native HTML elements may not be supported in older browsers or some screen readers, it is recommended that the role and native element be paired whenever possible.

Reviewer 2: IE11 is the only real problem here, and NVDA/JAWS generally fill the gap. See also https://www.a11yproject.com/posts/2013-01-14-aria-landmark-roles/ where a previous a11yproject article talks about landmarks / support.

Author: Changed the paragraph to link to the article for more details on the mappings

#### Navigation role example

```html
<nav role="navigation">
  <ul>
    <li><a href="#a">Dexter</a></li>
    <li><a href="#b">Doctor Who</a></li>
    <li><a href="#c">Futurama</a></li>
  </ul>  
</nav>
```

> #### Form role example

Reviewer 2: search role example

```html
<form role="search">

>   <input type="text" name="search" />

Reviewer 2: input lacks accessible name.  while understood the demo is about landmarks, there shouldn't be examples that would indicate this is alright.

  <input type="text" id="search-input" name="search">
  <input type="submit" name="submit-btn" value="Search" />
</form>
```

#### Footer role example

```html
<footer role="contentinfo">
  <p>&copy; 2020 Small Business Ltd. All rights reserved.</p>
</footer>
```

> - View the [full list of available Landmark roles](https://www.w3.org/TR/wai-aria/#landmark_roles).

Reviewer: Can we use a paragraph here instead of an unordered list?

### Live Region Roles

> Live Region roles are used to alert screen readers and assistive technologies of dynamic changes to the contents of a page so that they can be announced to users. The reason for this is that dynamic changes may be visually noticeable, but that may not be the case for screen reader users for .

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Live Region roles are used to inform assistive technologies, such as screen readers, of dynamic changes to page content, so that they can be announced to users. The reason for this is that dynamic changes may be visually noticeable, but likely will be missed by users with low or no vision.
```

#### Alert role example

The most commonly used Live Region role is the `alert` role.

```html
<div role="alert">
  <h3>Error</h3>
  <p>Autosave failed.</p>
</div>
```

> When using the `alert` role, keep in mind that it should not be a focusable element and it should not require users to close it.

Reviewer 2: also worth noting that all content within a live region is flattened to a single text string.  per the example, no mention of the `h3` would be made in the announcement.

> - View the [full list of available Live Region roles](https://www.w3.org/TR/wai-aria/#live_region_roles).

Reviewer: Can we use a paragraph here instead of an unordered list?

### Widget Roles

> Widget roles are used to describe common interactive patterns or those that currently lack semantic equivalents in HTML. In most cases, these interactive patterns will be Javascript-driven. Widget roles should not be confused with `role="widget"` which is itself an abstract role.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Widget roles are used to describe common interactive patterns or those that currently lack semantic equivalents in HTML. In most cases, these interactive patterns will be JavaScript-driven. Widget roles should not be confused with `role="widget"` which is itself an abstract role.
```

> Widget roles are used to describe common interactive patterns or those that currently lack semantic equivalents in HTML. In most cases, these interactive patterns will be JavaScript-driven. Widget roles should not be confused with `role="widget"` which is itself an abstract role.

Reviewer: I'd suggest linking to [Abtract Roles in the spec](https://www.w3.org/TR/wai-aria-1.1/#isAbstract) to help inform the reader about what they are and why they shouldn't be used in code.

#### Tabs role example

A common interactive pattern that relies on Widget roles is the very familiar Tabs pattern. Tabs rely on three Widget roles, namely `tab`, `tabpanel`, and `tablist`.

```html
<div>
  <div role="tablist">

>     <button role="tab">Apples</button>

Reviewer 2: again, while understood the post is about roles specifically,  code examples should indicate other necessary attributes for such patterns to work properly. Or, there should be an explicit call out made for people to learn more about other necessary attributes

Author: Updated the example

    <button role="tab" aria-selected="false" aria-controls="oranges-tab" id="oranges">Oranges</button>
  </div>

  <div role="tabpanel" id="apples-tab" aria-labelledby="apples">
    <p>Apples tab content</p>
  </div>

  <div role="tabpanel" id="oranges-tab" aria-labelledby="oranges">
    <p>Oranges tab content</p>
  </div>
</div>
```

The `tablist` role is a composite Widget role, which means it is a container used to manage other contained widgets. It is used to contain the list of `tab` elements, each of which is an interactive element. When a `tab` element is activated, it will cause its associated `tabpanel` container to display.

> - View the [full list of available Widget roles](https://www.w3.org/TR/wai-aria/#widget_roles).

Reviewer: Can we use a paragraph here instead of an unordered list?

### Window Roles

Window roles are used when creating sub-windows to the primary application or document. A typical example is a modal dialog. The available Window roles are `alertdialog` and `dialog`.

#### Alertdialog role example

An `alertdialog` is a dialog that contains an alert message and focus is initially set to an element within the dialog. While the dialog is visible, keyboard and mouse interactions are limited to the elements within the dialog.

```html
<div role="alertdialog">
  <h2>Confirmation</h2>

  <p>Are you sure you want to discard all of your notes?</p>

  <div>
    <button type="button">No</button>
    <button type="button">Yes</button>
  </div>
</div>
```

#### Dialog role example

> A `dialog` is an application window that separates certain content or UI from the rest of the page. Like the `alertdialog` role, elements within the `dialog` can receive focus. Unlike the `alertdialog` however, `dialog`s may or may not allow interaction with content outside the dialog i.e. modal or non-modal.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A `dialog` is a window that separates certain content or UI from the rest of the page. Like the `alertdialog` role, elements within the `dialog` can receive focus. While `alertdialog`s are more often than not modal (confining a user's interaction to the contents of the alert dialog until it is dismissed), a standard `dialog` can be modal or not.  When not modal, people may be able to interact with the contents of the dialog, as well as the primary content of the page, freely.
```

```html

> <div role="dialog">

Reviewer 2: should have accessible name, e.g., aria-labelledby pointing to h2.

  <h2 id="dialog-label">Dialog Title</h2>
  <p>This is the dialog content.</p>

  <button>Close Dialog</button>
</div>
```

> - View the [full list of available Window roles](https://www.w3.org/TR/wai-aria/#window_roles).

Reviewer: Can we use a paragraph here instead of an unordered list?
